Release 2.17.0 (#7285)
timescale/timescaledb: CHANGELOG.md

`psql` with the `-X` flag to prevent any `.psqlrc` commands from
accidentally triggering the load of a previous DB version.**

## 2.17.0 (2024-09-20)

This release contains performance improvements and bug fixes since
the 2.16.1 release. We recommend that you upgrade at the next
available opportunity.

**Features**
* #6882: Allow DELETE on the compressed chunks without decompression.

> * #7033: Use MERGE statement on Continuous Aggregates Refresh.

Reviewer: could you please use lower case here, we're trying to use it consistently for feature names

Author: edited so.

* #7126: Add functions to show the compression information.
* #7147: Vectorize partial aggregation for `sum(int4)` with grouping on `segment by` columns.
* #7204: Track additional extensions in telemetry.
* #7207: Refactor the `decompress_batches_scan` functions for easier maintenance.
* #7209: Add a function to drop the `osm` chunk.

> **Bugfixes**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Bug fixes**
```

Author: edited so

`psql` with the `-X` flag to prevent any `.psqlrc` commands from
accidentally triggering the load of a previous DB version.**

## 2.17.0 (2024-09-20)

This release contains performance improvements and bug fixes since
the 2.16.1 release. We recommend that you upgrade at the next
available opportunity.

In addition, it includes these noteworthy features:

* Full PostgreSQL 17 support for all existing features

**PostgreSQL 14 deprecation announcement**

> We will continue supporting PostgreSQL 14 until April 2025. Sooner to that time, we will announce the specific version of TimescaleDB in which PostgreSQL 14 support will not be included going forward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will continue supporting PostgreSQL 14 until April 2025. Closer to that time, we will announce the specific version of TimescaleDB in which PostgreSQL 14 support will not be included going forward.
```

Author: edited so.

> This release contains performance improvements and bug fixes since
> the 2.16.1 release. We recommend that you upgrade at the next
> available opportunity.
> 
> In addition, it includes these noteworthy features:
> 
> * Full PostgreSQL 17 support for all existing features
> 
> 
> **PostgreSQL 14 deprecation announcement**
> We will continue supporting PostgreSQL 14 until April 2025. Sooner to that time, we will announce the specific version of TimescaleDB in which PostgreSQL 14 support will not be included going forward.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This release adds support for PostgreSQL 17, significantly improves the performance of continuous aggregate refreshes, 
and contains performance improvements for analytical queries and delete operations over compressed hypertables. 
We recommend that you upgrade at the next available opportunity.

**Highlighted features in TimescaleDB v2.17.0**
* Full PostgreSQL 17 support for all existing features. TimescaleDB v2.17 is available for PostgreSQL 14, 15, 16 and 17.

  PostgreSQL 17 support for the Toolkit Extension will follow soon and will be announced on [Toolkit's release notes](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb-toolkit/releases).  

* Significant performance improvements for continuous aggregate policies: Continuous aggregate refresh is now using MERGE instead of deleting old materialized data and re-inserting.

  This update can decrease dramatically the amount of data that must be written on the continuous aggregate in the
  presence of a small number of changes, reduce the I/O cost of refreshing a continuous aggregate and generate less WAL.
  Overall, continuous aggregate policies will be more lightweight, use less system resources and complete faster.

* Increased performance for real-time analytical queries over compressed hypertables:
  We are excited to introduce vectorized query execution (SIMD optimizations) to our engine by supporting vectorized
  execution for queries that group by using the `segment_by` column(s) and aggregate using the basic aggregate
  functions (sum, count, avg, min/max).  

  Stay tuned for more to come in follow-up releases! Support for grouping on additional columns, filtered aggregation,
  vectorized expressions and `time_bucket` is coming soon. 

* Improved performance of deletes on compressed hypertables when a large amount of data is affected.
This improvement speeds up operations that delete everything for a specific segment or when whole compressed 
batches can be deleted (of up to 1000 continuous records when ordered by time or the order_by). 

**PostgreSQL 14 deprecation announcement**
We will continue supporting PostgreSQL 14 until April 2025. Sooner to that time, we will announce the specific
version of TimescaleDB in which PostgreSQL 14 support will not be included going forward.

```

Reviewer 2: @fabriziomello @akuzm @svenklemm for your review in case anything needs fixing or I forgot about something important.

Author: Edited, please check.

Author: Added Fabrizio & Alex as reviewers to this PR. Please check.

Reviewer 2: Resolving this conversation - please check directly on the final version of the changelog

**Features**

> * #6882: Allow delete on the compressed chunks without decompression.

Reviewer 2: This sounds really deceptive - let's rephrase a little bit

```suggestion
* #6882: Allow delete of fully covered compressed batches on compressed chunks without decompression.
```

@svenklemm agree?

Author: Edited, please check.

Reviewer 3: Hmm not sure your wording makes it more clear what this is about. This is about deleting full segments without decompression.

Author: Edited, please check

* #7033: Use `merge` statement on continuous aggregates refresh.
* #7126: Add functions to show the compression information.
* #7147: Vectorize partial aggregation for `sum(int4)` with grouping on `segment by` columns.
* #7204: Track additional extensions in telemetry.
* #7207: Refactor the `decompress_batches_scan` functions for easier maintenance.
* #7209: Add a function to drop the `osm` chunk.
* #7275: Add support for the `returning` clause for `merge`.

> * #7295: Support `alter table set access method` on the hypertable.

Reviewer 2: @pallavisontakke @svenklemm @mkindahl Why is this included? Should we be careful about releasing anything related to the TAM early?

For sure it should not be part of the list in the release notes even if we want to keep it around

Reviewer 4: Agree, we can exclude this commit from the release. It is needed for the TAM eventually, but the code does not do much currently (except allowing multiple commands to `ALTER TABLE`).

Author: Does that mean we want to revert just this release-note while keeping the src-code commit in `main` ? As this description in-detail would get included during `2.18.0` hypercore  release.

Reviewer 4: The commit has to be in main for a later release, but when you create the 2.17.x branch, you can remove this commit from the history. It contains a name string which might not be the final name of the table access method, so it makes sense to remove it.

Author: Removed the release-note for PR #7295 , as it's more a part of 2.18 story.

`psql` with the `-X` flag to prevent any `.psqlrc` commands from
accidentally triggering the load of a previous DB version.**

## 2.17.0 (2024-09-20)

This release adds support for PostgreSQL 17, significantly improves the performance of continuous aggregate refreshes,
and contains performance improvements for analytical queries and delete operations over compressed hypertables.
We recommend that you upgrade at the next available opportunity.

**Highlighted features in TimescaleDB v2.17.0**

* Full PostgreSQL 17 support for all existing features. TimescaleDB v2.17 is available for PostgreSQL 14, 15, 16 and 17.

>   PostgreSQL 17 support for the Toolkit Extension will follow soon and will be announced on [Toolkit's release notes](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb-toolkit/releases).

Reviewer 3: Do we need status update on toolkit on the timescaledb release notes?

>   PostgreSQL 17 support for the Toolkit Extension will follow soon and will be announced on [Toolkit's release notes](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb-toolkit/releases).

Author: Question for @iroussos

>   PostgreSQL 17 support for the Toolkit Extension will follow soon and will be announced on [Toolkit's release notes](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb-toolkit/releases).

Reviewer 2: Yeah we don't usually include that info, I am going to remove it

> 
>   PostgreSQL 17 support for the Toolkit Extension will follow soon and will be announced on [Toolkit's release notes](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb-toolkit/releases).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

* Significant performance improvements for continuous aggregate policies: Continuous aggregate refresh is now using
`merge` instead of deleting old materialized data and re-inserting.

  This update can decrease dramatically the amount of data that must be written on the continuous aggregate in the

>   presence of a small number of changes, reduce the `i/o` cost of refreshing a continuous aggregate and generate less
>   `wal`.

Reviewer 2: Your call, but both I/O and [WAL](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/wal-intro.html) are canonically referenced in capital letters

```suggestion
  presence of a small number of changes, reduce the `I/O` cost of refreshing a continuous aggregate and generate less
  amount of Write-Ahead Logs (`WAL`).
```

Author: Edited so.

  Overall, continuous aggregate policies will be more lightweight, use less system resources and complete faster.

* Increased performance for real-time analytical queries over compressed hypertables:

>   We are excited to introduce vectorized query execution (`simd` optimizations) to our engine by supporting vectorized

Reviewer 2: Also [Single instruction, multiple data (SIMD)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_instruction,_multiple_data) is usually referenced using capital letters. Yours once more, but it looks weird to me:

```suggestion
  We are excited to introduce vectorized query execution (`SIMD` optimizations) to our engine by supporting vectorized
```

Author: Edited so.

  execution for queries that group by using the `segment_by` column(s) and aggregate using the basic aggregate

>   functions (sum, count, `avg`, `min/max`).

Reviewer 2: If we are going to mark those, why not mark everything? 

```suggestion
  functions (`sum`, `count`, `avg`, `min`, `max`).
```

  Stay tuned for more to come in follow-up releases! Support for grouping on additional columns, filtered aggregation,
  vectorized expressions, and `time_bucket` is coming soon.

* Improved performance of deletes on compressed hypertables when a large amount of data is affected.

>   This improvement speeds up operations that delete everything for a specific segment or when whole compressed
>   batches can be deleted (of up to 1000 continuous records when ordered by time or the `order_by`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  This improvement speeds up operations that delete whole segments by skipping the decompression step.
  It is enabled for all deletes that filter by the `segment_by` column(s).
```

**PostgreSQL 14 deprecation announcement**

  We will continue supporting PostgreSQL 14 until April 2025. Closer to that time, we will announce the specific
  version of TimescaleDB in which PostgreSQL 14 support will not be included going forward.

**Features**

> * #6882: Allow delete of fully covered compressed batches on compressed chunks , i.e. delete full segments without decompression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* #6882: Allow delete of fully covered compressed batches on compressed chunks,  that is, delete full segments without decompression.
```

> * #6882: Allow delete of fully covered compressed batches on compressed chunks , i.e. delete full segments without decompression.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* #6882: Allow delete of full segments on compressed chunks without decompression.
```
